In late 1840,
the great powers of Europe gathered after the fall of Napoleon to discuss what
to do next at the time, the consonants, it was in ruins.
The old order that exploded as effectively as if someone had detonated an,
a bomb below it, just as it would in 1945,
Europe needed a new roadmap, a blueprint to the future,
designing that blueprint. Well, they fell to one. Man met Nick.
The foreign minister of the Austrian empire met Nick was a dandy,
a womanizer and a comically pompous for, in addition to all of that,
he was also one of the greatest diplomats who ever lived under his guidance.
Post Napoleon Europe was forged into a conserv system that would last
nearly a hundred years.
His blueprint ensured the continents 19th century was far less bloody than
either its 18th or its 20th yet.
Meta Nick also tried to strangle the forces of nationalism at birthed in doing
so. He set the stage for his own destruction,
a master strategist to some, a vein buffoon to others.
This is the life of Europe's Coachmen.
The world me was born into would be unrecognizable to bus today.
The center of Europe was dominated not by Germany,
but by something known as the holy Roman empire millennia,
old collection of tiny states all joined together.
It was in one of these tiny states on the west bank of the rhyme that met an was
born on may the 15th, 17 S three, or to give him his full name.
That would be Clemmens veil NA per Loha.
First VA met Nick Berg Baine and I'm sure I screwed up the pronunciation on
that. You can have a GMY if you want to.
Although met Nick was from the Germanic, holy Roman am empire.
It was France that had the biggest impact on his early life.
Met Nick's home state was right on the buffer zone with the France of Louie the
16th. So the boy grew up speaking better French than he did German.
Despite his father being an Austrian Envoy. This wasn't all that unusual though.
France exerted a powerful pull over continental or Europe in the 18th century.
And it seemed totally natural that met Nick would be sent off to the French city
of STRs Borg to complete his education in 1788.
Unfortunately for the teenage met in France at the end of the 1780s,
it was a ticking time bomb on July the 14th,
1789 years of political turmoil in Paris exploded onto the
streets, a mob stormed, the Bastille armor lynching, the Garrison commander.
This, this was the opening salvo of the French revolution.
And it was about to the entire continent.
Despite being the sort of age when waving the revolutionary flag might seem
appealing.
Madic was disgusted by the unfolding drama for MEIC any upending of the natural
conservative order of Europe was an athema. He become Strasburg for mines,
posthaste, but betta Nick was about to learn a very important lesson.
When the cannon ball of revolution gets rolling.
There's no escape in April of 1792,
a French army whipped into a revolutionary frenzy invaded the holy Roman and
empire burning pillaging and destroying by now posted diplomatic
position in the Austria, Netherlands,
AKA Belgium alongside his father met Nick was forced to watch in horror as the
French annexed, his family's home state in 1794,
which left them with nothing bar.
He got his head around this when the French overran,
the Austria Netherlands and the boy and his father,
they were forced to flee to Vienna. Although the Metanx were now few GS,
they were still people of means with good connections to Austria's elite.
So met Nick exile was less Moses in the desert and more rich Playboy
sleeping around in Vienna, even managed to marry and an Vaun.
The daughter of Austria's former chancellor while met Nick was serially
unfaithful to how the marriage.
It still meant family up in the world of Austrian politics,
but fate and France, they weren't done with met on November the ninth,
1799, a French army officer staged Aku in Paris,
putting himself in charge of the revolutionary war machine, that dude's name.
Well, that would be Napoleon Bonna apart.
And he was about to plunge Europe into utter chaos.
From Metanx perspective,
the 19th century must have felt like settling into a comfy arm chair that
suddenly grows teeth and then devours you in 1801.
Vienna's newest man about town was promoted to ambassador and he was sent to Dr.
Resident. And then he was sent to Berlin. As Napoleon kept conquering.
Mattick enjoyed the Prussian capital's night life all while gamely,
trying to persuade his hosts to join Vienna in a war against France.
So for a guy known for his diplomatic acumen,
we described him as one of the greatest diplomats who ever lived. Matt.
Nick totally messed this one up after years of controlling the Prussians,
they finally put their foot down in 1805 and told him
nine. That was the moments, the geopolitical arm chair.
It swallowed our young ambassador whole on December, the second, 1806,
the Russian holy Roman and Austrian armies minus PR all met to battle
in France at Oz,
the Napoleonic army mopped the floor with them.
The third coalition lost the battle so badly that the holy Roman
empire was destroyed. Austria was forced to become an ally of France.
Would things have gone differently if pressure had been there? Well it's to say,
but they couldn't have exactly gone any worse.
Still meta Nick's catastrophic fail in Berlin did not stop him from getting an
ambassadorship to Paris under Austria's. Now pro Napoleon leadership.
Sadly MEIC had not learned from his mistakes on may the second, 1808,
an uprising in French occupied Spain triggered a crisis in Paris egged on by met
breathless reports that Napoleon was losing his grip on power.
Vienna took a risky gamble in 1809.
Austria rolled everything on a surprise attack.
When he Al that one went the war of the fifth coalition was a monumental
embarrassment for Austria Napoleon. He just crushed them.
Not only that he imposed one of the most humiliating peace treaters in all of
history.
Vienna lost a ton of territory and was forced to pay Paris a ton of money as
well. Ferme personally though,
things turned out surprisingly well in the aftermath of the new treaty.
He escaped to blame. Not only that, he also got promoted on October the eighth,
80 0 9 and B Francis. The first made met then just 36 years old,
his foreign minister that's supposed,
he would hold for the next 40 years with Nabo. Now,
basically in charge of Europe,
Austria's new foreign minister was forced to use all of his legendary charm to
try and placate. This created some humiliating moments,
such as when Napoleon invaded Russia in 1812,
Austria was forced to send its own army in support of the French well,
net and air managed to secure their nominal independence under Austrian
commanders.
It was just crumbs from Napoleon table or so it seemed when Napoleons
latest adventure unexpectedly blue up in his face,
Austria was able to sign a peace deal with the Russians.
Vienna could then sit out of the catastrophic French retreat across the
continent for his part.
Madic didn't believe that this was really the end of Napoleon in mid 18, 13.
He tried to broker a peace deal between France and Russia and Russia that would
allow Napoleon to stay on the throne. It was only when Napoleon said no,
that met, signed Austria up to the sixth coalition.
If you recognize that name,
the sixth coalition it's because these are the guys that actually did it.
They are the ones that rid Europe of its tyrants on March 31st, 18,
14, the armies of the sixth coalition.
They captured Paris with COEX marching down the banks of the San Napoleon.
He finally threw in the towel, the petite corporal abdicated,
and was exiled to the island of El across the Europe.
Cries of victory went up,
but there was just one teeny tiny problem.
What the heck did everyone do now
Signed for us to take a quick step back in time to something called the treaty
of RK signed in 1713 at the end of the war of Spanish succession,
the treaty was designed to keep Europe super powers from super killing each
other by delicately balancing power between them.
The French revolution had exposed the limits of this century,
old treaty even before. And the POS defeat in 1814,
everyone knew that a new treaty was needed.
One that would ensure against another continent wide war. Unfortunately,
all the great powers that had just defeated France.
They all wanted different things.
Now we'll get into the nitty gritty in a minute. Just know that for now,
everyone in 1814 was aware that a mishandled post Napoleon piece could be
catastrophic before the six coalition had even won that agreed to a Congress to
hammer all of their differences out somehow met.
He convinced them to hold it in Vienna.
The Congress of Vienna is one of the most important diplomatic gatherings
in history.
So to make sure we can all get our heads around this extremely important event,
we're gonna need to take a quick detour through some of the main players.
This is gonna get a little bit intense. So pay attention, please.
The four key powers at the Congress were Austria,
obviously as well as Russia pressure and great Britain since Austria
was playing on their home turf. That means putting MEIC in charge of everything.
His goals were to maintain the balance of power by ensuring that postwar fronts
didn't get too weak and Russia and PR did not get too strong Britain. Meanwhile,
and guy over called via count Carre who broadly agreed with MEIC about
not to in France and not giving Russia and Russia. Everything.
Russia sent a delegation who were led from behind the scenes by the big boss,
Frederick VI hem III on Freddy's grand plan was to hobble,
France and gobble Upsy for Berlin. Finally,
Russia sent the head honcho himself, Sarah Alexander.
The first was the Congress, his wild card.
Not only was he negotiating for Russia personally,
but he also wanted some odd things like giving the polls their own country.
A big deal since PRS and Austria, both owned Polish territory.
Although the table was designed for four people,
there was one last guy to add into the mix.
This was char Murray to tell Aran per better known,
just as tell he was a French diplomat and weasel
extraordinaire. He was so adaptable that it served under Louie, the 16th,
the French revolutionary government and an Napoleon.
And now he was in Vienna claiming to represent the recently restored French
Monarch, Louie, the 18th,
obviously pressure and Russia trying to of TRO outta the room, France. I mean,
they'd just been defeated. That was simply no seat for him,
but MEIC thought rather differently.
Remember he wanted to make France weaker than under Napoleon,
but not so weak that it created a power vacuum. That pressure might exploit.
So the teamed up with castle and got TRO into the table's new fifth seat.
So those are our players, Matt, Nick for Austria caste for Britain,
Frederick Wilhem II for PR Alexander,
the first for Russia and taro for France.
Now all of them wanted very different things and all of them held the fate of
Europe in their hands.
As the entourages of these great men descended on Vienna in the fall of 18, 14,
the pendulum of history. It could have swung in any one of a trillion ways.
Luckily for the conservative action net only had a plan.
The women's Congress of Vienna are probably conjuring images of boring dudes in
silly clothes, sitting around tables and talking about impenetrable stuff. Well,
you could not be more wrong.
The Congress of Vienna was designed by MEIC to be the social events of the
century. There were parties almost every night.
These were glittering balls held by the glow of candlelight.
There were excursions to the greatest salons that Imperial Vienna had to offer
the wine. It flowed freely. There was dancing, romantic liaisons,
drunken affairs,
one source we've seen even claims two of the top participants nearly got in a
dual, all of this Devery it wasn't dereliction of duty.
It was all part of met plant. I remember that the,
before he was Austrian foreign minister met Nick was a womanizing party animal
in Vienna. So this was kind of his territory.
He was the master of the quiet conversation over cigars in Amoy club of the
well placed word on the dance floor of buttering someone up over wine as the
great men of history drank and danced and seduced their air across a met Nick
was working the crowd like a Silicon valley hotshot. He had the perfect allies.
His endeavor Tran was even more of a social butterfly than met.
Nick was while they had their differences.
The two were able to deploy a joint charm offensive to make sure that Russia and
PR didn't demand that France be carved up.
Cast Ray was even better while he wasn't a total bro.
He was representing Britain,
the country with the deepest pockets in the world and caste who saw II with
met Nick on many major issues.
Wasn't afraid to splash London's cash to get what he wanted by February of
1815, the final shape of the Congress.
It was clearly visible Alexander's plans to liberate the polls had been bought
off by offering him a chunk of Polands while pressure had agreed to make due
with just a three fifths of SNY France.
Meanwhile was to be pushed back into its pre revolutionary borders, smaller,
but still powerful. The holy Roman empire would be replaced with 39 states,
collectively known as the German Confederation with Austria at its head.
And naturally there were other outcomes too,
including a guarantee of Swiss neutrality and a commitment to free trade along.
Europe's rivers clause cherished by castle Ray.
But the big headline news was the establishments of the Congress system.
Spearheaded by met this new system would commit Europe's great powers to meeting
every year to discuss events and hopefully void war.
It also committed Europe's powers to supporting Mons and empires over
nationalist movements.
This was perhaps Meta's biggest contribution to world history.
MEIC deeply believed that most Europeans were natural conservatives who
preferred order and safety over the madness of revolution.
And now everyone was agreeing with him. The Europe that emerged the Congress.
It wasn't just some shiny new thing,
but it was a place governed by king by family. And by God,
this was everything that met. Nick had wanted at least in the broader sense,
but before he got it,
there was one last nightmare to live through on March the seventh, 18,
14, meta Nick was woken by an aid with some terrible news,
not just for meta Nick, but the entire Congress Napoleon had escaped elder.
Not only that he was on his way back to France and the French people,
they were rallying to his cause.
Such news could only mean one thing and that's that it was time for war.
Once again,
When the news of Napoleon's escape reached the Congress panic hit within days,
met, was making plans to depart Vienna in France.
The news caused the restored Louis the 18th to flee the country.
It was like waking from a nightmare to find out that your still dreaming Europe
was almost paralyzed by the fear that Napoleon's return would be even worse in
his first reign. Luckily, things didn't quite work out like that.
The period of Napoleon's return is known as the hundred days because, uh,
that's roughly how long it lasted by June the 18th, 1815,
the seventh coalition had forced the battle of water loop there. The British,
the Russian, they defeated Napoleon once. And for all back in the end,
the Congress actually hadn't had time to disband by the time of Waterloo netic
himself was still in the city.
This turned out to be fortunate when Prusa and Russia demanded France,
be made to pay for the latest insult netic marshalled all of his charm to make
sure that the Congress' outcome remained the same as in February, remarkably,
the a hundred days, they changed almost nothing in July 18, 15,
the Congress of Vienna. It finally disbanded with it,
went to the era of revolution.
The era of Napoleon and its place came. The age of met.
It was during this new ages.
Europe was cautiously settling into a life without war that met,
became known as the Coachman of Europe.
Certainly he was in the driver's seat on many occasions in 1819,
he headed the Carlsbad conference that committed the German Confederation to
cracking down hard on freedom of speech,
repressing liberal national movements and monitoring universities for edition.
He also headed a string of great power conferences,
so successful worthy that the first mate met chancellor of Austria.
However, it wasn't all roses for Europe's new driver met wasn't an idiot.
He knew history was turning in favor of national movements and he hoped to nip
them in the butt back.
Me actually drew up a plan for Austria's many ethnic groups to get their own
parliament. He hopes that giving the Hungarians checks Italians,
so on a shred of autonomy would inoculate Austria against further revolution,
but Francis shot him down essentially saying, yeah, man,
I loved your secret police. And you know,
the crushing of free speech and all that great stuff,
but go what's with all your national pride for Hungarians,
nobody wants that still MEIC remains a big figure on the world's stage.
Even when it's Congress system broke down over in arguments with Britain about
Greek revolution, people clung to the basic ideas that had outlined in Vienna.
In fact, by the 1830s, they were clinging harder than ever on July the 27th,
1830,
a three day rebellion broke out in France that overthrew the restored Royals and
replaced them with the July monarchy belly. A month later,
Belgium exploded in a national uprising against the Netherlands.
Just three months after that,
the polls also went into rebellion against their Russian LORs and then 1831
rolled arounds and,
and Italian uprising forced the Austrians into armed intervention.
For those who who'd started to doubt MEIC system,
the multiple revolutions of 1830 to 1831 were a bit of a wake up call the rulers
of Europe. They clamped down hard on nationalist feelings, which must have left.
MEIC feeling rather vindicated, but the revolutions could be seen in other way,
too.
They could be seen as a sign that MEIC system was not built a top firm grounds,
but that was, has built atop a rumbling volcano.
It would only be a matter of time before that volcano exploded.
Even as Metanx statue grew on the world stage,
she was starting to slip into the Twilight of his career at home in the
Vietnamese quarter dash new liberal Bohemian prince Fran Anton graph Von
Cora was suddenly the rising star making MEIC look clumsy and slow
and reactionary.
Metanx vanity was so offended by this that he started claiming every major
policy initiative in Austria as his own, even the bad ones,
not the MEIC made many good sees himself though.
Take the issue of succession Francis.
The First's eldest son Fe end was known by everyone to be intellectually
disabled,
to the point of being unable to rule Francis had daughters and he had other
sons, all of whom could have succeeded him,
but tame Nick was such a stickler for old fashioned eldest son only succession
that he actually talked Francis into, not Ussing over Fe end.
And so it was that on March the second, 1835 Fe end,
the first ascended to the Austrian throne.
Anyone hoping for a reformist ruler instead got a guy who simply couldn't rule
as the years,
dragged by meta X choices went from annoying to actively embarrassing in the
late 1830s.
He tried to revive as congresses to no about the great powers they wanted to get
involved. Europe may have been shaped by met system,
but it sures heck didn't want to be ruled by him.
Not that all the things making met unpopular were his fault though.
The fam in this script, Europe in the 1840s, for example,
or the financial panic that tipped part of the consonance into recession.
What was Mets fault though?
Was the secret police network that was watching everyone at home.
It was arresting people for dissent,
giving them nowhere to air legitimate grievances.
Instead the people had to bottle everything up. Every P of hunger,
every miserable indignity. It was a recipe that was ripe for disaster.
All it needed was an outside shock and everything was gonna come crashing down.
And in 1848, that shock finally came.
If you study 19th century European history or better just watch our videos on
the subject. That's good too.
1848 is the year that you'll keep coming back to because that's the year that
everything kind of went bananas. It started on February the 23rd that day,
a French government ban on holding banquets triggered a revolution that toppled
the July monarchy, the crash with which the king fell was enough to bring met.
Nick tumbling down to I now met Nick had been in power for nearly 40 years.
He was a symbol of everything that was old and cautious and conservative in
Europe. So when news of the latest French revolution reached Vienna,
it made everyone hope that Austria could change two within days of the July,
monarchies collapse petitions were circulating through Vienna, demanding,
liberalization, these petitions, they weren't calling the Meta's head.
They just wanted an end to his system. But since under that system,
the act of signing a petition was illegal.
MEIC demanded all the tens of thousands of people who put their names down to be
arrested. So you know that old phrase to shoot yourself through the foot. Well,
this was methane accidentally blowing his own head off the short version
of what happened next is that Vienna's poor liberal students decided to protest
the government's crackdown on March the 13th, 1848.
A huge crowd gathered in the city, met Nick demanded that the crowds be crushed.
The government's anti-me faction,
counseled peace with the results that it was decided to not crush the crowds,
but maybe just squash them just a little,
whatever the correct matter for the cavalry was sent in at exactly the wrong
strength wrong because there weren't enough of them to disperse the crowd or
really do anything except for spark a panic.
The panicked crowd attacked the cavalry who fought back killing five students.
The firefighter triggered mass insurrection and the civil guard were called in.
Unfortunately the civil guard took one,
look at the unfolding revolution and decided,
decide with the revolutionaries with the city.
Now in revolt MEIC was given until 9:00 PM to resign at first
MEIC he refused, but as the clock ticked down,
the situation got really ugly reality.
Finally dawned on the aging chancellor just before the stroke of nine,
MEIC announced his resignation the next day, March the 14th, 1848.
He fled to exile in London. And with that,
the age of MEIC was over the next two years though.
They were crazy as MEIC watched impotently from England's Virgin.
And the first was overthrown and replaced with emperor France. Joseph,
the Hungarians and Italians went into rebellion and pressures.
Liberals revolted. When the dust finally settled though,
one thing was absolutely fair. Some how against all ODS MEIC system,
it was still standing. Yep.
The revolutions of 1848 basically failed the old order.
It was restored across the continent.
Even France simply replaced the July monarchy with the dictatorship of Napoleon
thei in 1851, MEOC was even allowed to return to Vienna.
It was the triumph of sorts and the old statesman soon back in the corridors of
power, but time was no longer on its side. On June, the 11th,
1859 Metanx health gave out. He passed away in Vienna age, 86,
but while met, the man was gone. This is to be created,
would stay in place for another 60 years in various guises,
met blueprints for Europe. It remained in dual world war. I,
it also succeeded in its mission to keep the peace between the Congress of
Vienna and world war I,
the biggest war fought in mainland Europe was the Franco Prussian war compared
to the Napoleonic war saw world war I war, world war II.
It was peanuts for all his faults.
Met was a man who built something that lasted. He may have been vain repressive,
and sometimes effectively stupid,
but he was still the man who sat in Europe's driving seat for decades for better
or worse. Our world would be very different without him.
So I really hope you found their video. Interesting. If you did,
please do give us a thumbs up below if also got loads of other videos about this
time in history.
So please do check them out and subscribe to this channel for brand new videos.
Also, I've got another channel it's called today.
I found out you'll find that linked to below and as always,
thank you for watching.